In this video I'll explain how virtual machines are able to utilize the memory resources of the hypervisor.
And so let's take a look at a diagram here that will explain a little bit about how this works.
And the blue blocks that you see here represent my virtual machines.
So each virtual machine is going to have its own operating system.
In this case I'll just assume it's Windows.
So my virtual machines have the Windows operating system installed on them and I'm going to have applications
running within both of these virtual machines.
And when I create these vim's I'm going to allocate a certain amount of memory to them.
So each VM is going to be granted for gags or 10 games or whatever a certain amount of memory and that
means that that virtual machine is able to use a maximum of that amount of memory.
But we're not really guaranteeing a certain amount of physical resources to any of these Vienna's so
sort of like with our processors.
This works much in the same way.
Just because I give a virtual machine a 2 gig memory allocation doesn't mean that I'm actually guaranteeing
that VM 2 gigs of physical memory at all times the virtual machines are going to share the physical
memory of the host and I may have oversubscription right.
So for example in this little scenario here maybe I've granted this VM for gigs of memory and this VM
has been granted 8 gigs of memory.
Now that's simply what I've allocated right the host itself might have a total of let's say 10 gigs
of memory.
This is possible because the host can efficiently share its memory across multiple virtual machines
and I can over subscribe.
This is how my hypervisor efficiently shares resources across multiple VM.
Let's say in this scenario on my first virtual machine I launch some application.
So within Windows I've launched this application and Windows has its own memory table.
It's got a memory table where it tracks free and used memory pages so as far as Windows is concerned
if I allocated this VM with 4 gigs of memory Windows thinks I've got 4 gigs of physical memory.
Windows can't tell the difference it's inside of a virtual machine.
It has no idea that it's been virtualizing.
So as applications launch within Windows it will allocate pages of memory within that four gigabytes
and it'll track that memory in which pages are free and which pages are used
and on the hypervisor itself.
The hypervisor is then mapping those memory pages that are being allocated within the guest OS to actual
real physical pages of memory.
And that's kind of the beauty of the way that the hypervisor works because until an application is actually
launched the memory is not used.
So this VM may be configured with 4 gigs of memory but it's not actually using 4 gigs.
You know I'm making this for kind of messy hair but the VM is allocated 4 gigs of memory.
It doesn't actually take 4 gigs of memory on the physical host until it needs it.
The memory is thin provisioned.
I mean does action only granted to the VM when the VM actually requires it.
So that's one of the ways that my hypervisor efficiently uses memory and then maybe I've got another
virtual machine that's also launching applications and Windows is marking those pages in it's own memory
table right.
Allocating virtual memory to those applications and those memory pages are being mapped by the hypervisor.
Back to physical pages of memory on the physical host.
And when a virtual machine actually closes an application the host is going to have to reclaim those
memory pages.
So let's assume that my virtual machine here closes app 1 when it closes app on the operating system
is immediately aware that app 1 has been closed.
And so the operating system marks those pages as free.
Now we have to remember these windows instances these guest operating systems don't know they're running
within a virtual machine.
So the guest operating system is never going to inform the host.
Hey I don't need these memory pages anymore.
That doesn't happen so we have to have some kind of mechanism running on the physical host running on
the hypervisor to occasionally look inside of the guest operating system see what memory is being used.
See what memory is not being used anymore and if those memory pages are no longer in use take them back
and allow other virtual machines to use them.
Now there's one final thing I want to mention here while we're talking about memory.
If I want to I can utilize something called a memory reservation.
So for example if my VM on the left has been granted 4 gigs of memory I have allocated 4 gigs of memory
if I want to I can create a memory reservation and what a memory reservation will do as it will carve
out 4 gigs of physical memory and it will guarantee that memory to that virtual machine at all times.
No other Reems can leverage that for gigs of memory.
It's been specifically reserved for that particular virtual machine and in most cases reservations are
not very desirable.
And the reason I say that is because it's great for the virtual machine that you've reserved that memory
for.
But for all of the other virtual machines running on that host that's 4 gigs of memory that they can
not use.
I always sort of equate memory reservation to a kid liking a toy.
Let's say there is this one a really fancy toy and a roomful of kids and one kid grabs it looks it and
plays all that and nobody wants to touch that toy anymore because it's been left right.
Even if he's not using that toy.
Nobody wants to touch it.
That's kind of like a reservation.
My VM may only be using 2 gigs of this memory that it has reserved and there might be 2 gigs of memory
sitting there idle but it doesn't matter that memory is reserved and no other virtual machines can use
it.
So we try and steer clear of reservations whenever possible.
So to quickly review when a virtual machine launches an application the guest operating system has its
own table tracking what we call ghast physical memory.
What the operating system of the VM perceives is physical memory and it goes ahead and maps of virtual
memory within the operating system to those applications which is then mapped back to the actual host
physical memory by the hypervisor.